_This is the 6th in a series of posts leading up to [Node.js Knockout][] on
using [hapi][].  This post was written by [Node Knockout participant][] and [hapi][]
contributor Wyatt Preul._

[Node.js Knockout]: http://nodeknockout.com
[hapi]: http://hapijs.com

[Hapi][] is a framework for rapidly building RESTful web services. Whether you
are building a very simple set of RESTful services or a large scale, cache
heavy, and secure set of services, [hapi][] has you covered.  [Hapi][] will
help get your server developed quickly with its wide range of configurable
options.

## Building a Products API

The following example will walk you through using hapi to build a RESTful set
of services for creating and listing out products. To get started create a
directory named _products_ and add a _package.json_ file to the directory
that looks like the following.

    {
        "name": "products",
        "version": "0.0.1",
        "main": "server",
        "engines": {
            "node": ">=0.10.0"
        },
        "peerDependencies": {
            "hapi": "1.x.x"
        }
    }

Create a _main.js_ file that will serve as the entry point for the service.
Add the following contents to the _server.js_ file.

    var hapi = require('hapi');
    var routes = require('./routes');

    var config = { docs: true };
    var http = new hapi.Server('0.0.0.0', 8080, config); // 8080 is the port to listen on

    http.addRoutes(routes);

    http.start();

In the _server.js_ code above a new instance of the hapi server is started
using the configuration specified in _config_.

By setting docs to true the [documentation generator][] will be enabled. The
documentation generator provides a set of pages that explain what endpoints
are available and the requirements for those endpoints. The documentation
generator will use the validation rules you will create for each route to
construct appropriate documentation pages under the _/docs_ path.

[documentation generator]: https://github.com/walmartlabs/hapi#documentation

[Hapi][] provides a function for adding a single route or an array of routes.
In this example we are adding an array of routes from a routes module.

Go ahead and create a _routes.js_ file, which will contain the route
information and handlers. When defining the routes we will also be specifying
[validation requirements][]. Therefore, at the top of the file require _hapi_
and assign its _Types_ property to a local variable like below.

[validation requirements]: https://github.com/walmartlabs/hapi/#data-validation

    var Types = require('hapi').Types;

For this example three routes will be created. Below is the code you should
use to add the routes. Add the following code to your _routes.js_ file.

    module.exports = [
        { method: 'GET', path: '/products', config: { handler: getProducts, query: { name: Types.String() } } },
        { method: 'GET', path: '/products/{id}', config: { handler: getProduct } },
        { method: 'POST', path: '/products', config: { handler: addProduct, payload: 'parse', schema: { name: Types.String().required().min(3) }, response: { id: Types.Number().required() } } }
    ];

The routes are exported as an array so that they can easily be included by the
server implementation we added. For the products listing endpoint we are
allowing a querystring parameter for name. When this querystring parameter
exists then we will filter the products for those that have a matching name.

The second route is a very simple route that demonstrates how a parameter can
become part of the path definition. This route will return a product matching
the ID thatâ€™s requested.

In the last route, the one used for creating a product, you will notice that
extra validation requirements are added, even those on the response body. The
request body must contain a parameter for name that has a minimum of 3
characters and the response body must contain an ID to be validated.

Next add the handlers to the _routes.js_ file.

    function getProducts(request) {

        if (request.query.name) {
            request.reply(findProducts(request.query.name));
        }
        else {
            request.reply(products);
        }
    }

    function findProducts(name) {
        return products.filter(function(product) {
            return product.name.toLowerCase() === name.toLowerCase();
        });
    }

    function getProduct(request) {
        var product = products.filter(function(p) {
            return p.id == request.params.id;
        }).pop();

        request.reply(product);
    }

    function addProduct(request) {
        var product = {
            id: products[products.length - 1].id + 1,
            name: request.payload.name
        };

        products.push(product);

        request.reply.created('/products/' + product.id)({
            id: product.id
        });
    }

As you can see in the handlers, [hapi][] provides a simple way to add a
response body by using the _request.reply_ function. Also, in the instance
when you have created an item you can use the _request.reply.created_ function
to send a 201 response.

Lastly, add a simple array to contain the products that the service will serve.

    var products = [{
            id: 1,
            name: 'Guitar'
        },
        {
            id: 2,
            name: 'Banjo'
        }
    ];

## Running the server

Go ahead and run `npm start` or `node server.js` to start the server.  Now you
can navigate to <http://localhost:8080/docs> to see the documentation for the
routes.  To see a list of the products navigate to
<http://locahost:8080/products>. Below is a screenshot of what the response
looks like.

<img src="https://raw.github.com/wpreul/hapi-example/master/images/products.png" height="75px" width="auto" />

Go ahead and append `?name=banjo` to the URL to try searching for a product by
name.

<img src="https://raw.github.com/wpreul/hapi-example/master/images/banjo.png" height="75px" width="auto" />

Use curl or a REST console to create a product. Make a POST request to the
products endpoint with a name in the body. Using curl the command looks like:
`curl http://localhost:8080/products -d "name=test"`. Below is an example of
the response headers from making a request to create a product.

<img src="https://raw.github.com/wpreul/hapi-example/master/images/headers.png" height="225px" width="auto" />

Now if you navigate to the _Location_ specified in the response headers you
should see the product that you created.

## Other features

There are a lot of different configuration features that you can add to the
server.  The extensive list can be found in the readme at
<https://github.com/walmartlabs/hapi/#server-configuration>.

The built-in cache support has providers for mongo and redis. Setting up cache
is as simple as passing cache: true as part of the server configuration.

Additionally, there are several configuration options available on a per route
basis.  The full list can be found at
<https://github.com/walmartlabs/hapi/#route-configuration>. For example,
caching expiration times can also be configured on a per route basis. Also,
you can have per-route authentication settings.

## Conclusion

By now you should have a decent understanding of what hapi has to offer.
There are still many other features and options available to you when using
hapi that is covered in the documentation.  Please take a look at the
[github repository][] and feel free to provide any feedback you may have.

[github repository]: https://github.com/wpreul/hapi-example
